(slow tempo music)
- The Fertile Crescent is
known in history to have hosted
some of the world's
greatest civilizations.
Babylonian, Assyrian ,
Egyptian, and Phoenician.
It's also aptly named
because its soil,
enriched by the flowing waters
of the Tigris and Euphrates,
gave birth to some of the
world's ancient and best crops,
such as barley, wheat,
lentils, and even peas.
Also originating from
the Fertile Crescent
is the ancient spelt.
Spelt is believed to be the
ancestor specie of modern wheat
and has been cultivated since
the fifth millennium BC.
Ancient spelt is considered
the parent of modern wheat.
How then did spelt come to be?
The most commonly known
theory is that spelt
was a result of hybridization
some 8,000 years ago
between another ancient
grain called emmer
and a wild goatgrass known
as aegilops squarrosa.
There are other archeological
data supporting a claim that
Europe also cultivated spelt
simultaneously with the near
east except that recent DNA
evidence shows that spelt,
originating from Europe, was
a result of cross- pollination
between emmer and bread wheat.
Spelt eventually spread to
central Europe during the
Bronze Age and then travelled
to other countries like
Switzerland and Germany
during the Iron Age.
In Germany, old records
dating back to 1850 show that
more than 90% of its
agricultural lands
were growing spelt
and only 5% was
growing bread wheat.
Spelt stayed an
important grain in Europe
until Middle Ages and
finally crossed the seas
all the way to the United
States in the 1890's.
Spelt grows from 1.4
to 1.7 meters tall
and has secondary stems.
Its leaves are long, narrow,
and with few to almost
no hairs at all.
It has long, thin,
and brittle spikes.
The spikelets contain
up to six flowers
that can produce two seeds
after self-pollination.
These seeds are
protected by hulls,
thus they're commonly
called hulled seeds
during harvest time.
Spelt is tolerant of
low fertility soils.
As a matter of fact, it
thrives well on sandy soils.
It can be grown in
low temperature areas
and is less sensitive
to cold and snow.
Altitude is also not a
problem because it's possible
to plant spelt at 1,200
meters above sea level.
Spelt is a low-yielding crop,
meaning its total harvest
is less than other crops.
There's a positive
side to this attribute.
As a low-yielding crop, it
can survive with minimal
or even without fertilizers,
even on less healthy soils.
Another standout attribute of
spelt is its very thick husk.
Not only does the husk
protect the grain from frost,
it also protects it from
pollutants and insects.
Removing the husk requires
longer post-harvest processing,
so some producers keep the
husk intact during transport,
which in turn maintains
the grain's freshness
for a longer period of time.
Spelt is both a winter
and summer crop.
In Europe, it's sown
as a winter crop.
While in the United
States and Canada,
it's sown as a summer crop.
Spelt was forgotten at
some point in history
due to the introduction
of other grains
that have higher yields
and are easier to process
for commercial
production purposes.
Spelt survived in small
areas and villages in Europe
and the near east and is
now gaining more recognition
for its nutritional value.
In the early years
of the 20th century,
Spelt started to lose its luster
when farmers were introduced
to its higher-yielding
and easier to process
wheat relative.
Since then spelt has
remained in obscurity,
which is a shame because
spelt has a lot to offer.
If spelt is basically the
older version of wheat,
how do they differ
from each other?
Aside from the obvious
distinctions in
their appearances,
DNA profiles and genetic makeup,
they also have different
nutritional profiles.
Let's break down its nutrient,
mineral, and vitamin content.
100 grams of uncooked spelt
contains the
following nutrients.
70 grams of Carbohydrates,
11 grams of Fiber,
15 grams of Protein
and 15 grams of Sodium.
It's packed with the
following minerals.
388 grams of Potassium,
4.44 milligrams of Iron,
136 milligrams of Magnesium,
401 milligrams of Phosphorus
and 3.28 milligrams of Zinc.
It has the following vitamins.
.36 milligrams of
Thiamin or Vitamin B1,
.113 rams of Riboflavin
or Vitamin B2,
6.8 milligrams of
Niacin or Vitamin B3,
45 micrograms of
Folate or Vitamin B9.
and .79 milligrams of Vitamin E.
Because of its high
fiber content, it is
easier for the body
to digest and absorb
its nutrients,
vitamins, and minerals.
The fiber also helps
prevent constipation,
thus making toxin elimination
faster and easier.
Spelt can also help reduce
risks of type 2 diabetes.
or other insulin
resistant diseases.
The combined powers of its
fiber, magnesium, and Vitamin E,
help enzymes facilitate
better secretion rate
of glucose in the body.
A special carbohydrate
called mucopolysaccharides
is present in spelt.
It's a long chain of hundreds
of glucose molecules,
which has a slow digestion
rate compared to carbohydrates
from refined grains.
Since it digests slowly,
the body gets packed with
energy for longer periods.
It is said that
ancient German warriors
and Roman legionnaires
ate spelt for endurance.
The mucopolysaccharides
also have anti-inflammatory
properties that can
keep bones, joints,
and cartilage healthy.
Spelt also has an excellent
amino acid profile.
It's comparable to
that of wheat's.
Spelt is believed to
promote good dispositions
and positive emotions
because of the amino acids,
phenylalanine and tryptophan.
These amino acids produce
dopamine and serotonin ,
two neurotransmitters that help
the brain control
mood and behavior.
Lately, people have been
rating a food's health value
based on its bioavailability.
Bioavailability pertains
to the amount or percentage
of nutrients the body
actually digests, absorbs,
and assimilates into its system.
Spelt is said to have high
bioavailability ratings.
The body doesn't need
to dispense more energy
just to ensure that spelt's
nutrients find their respective
places within the system.
Unlike quinoa and
amaranth, spelt has gluten.
People prone to allergies and
other wheat-related conditions
such as gluten sensitive and
tauopathies and celiac sprues
must first seek medical
advice before including spelt
in their diets.
Spelt may not be gluten-free,
but its gluten has a more
fragile composition
compared to wheats,
meaning spelt's gluten
can be easily broken down
by its high fiber content.
Modern wheat may out win
spelt in some aspects,
but because spelt is
still a whole grain
and has valuable
properties of its own,
it is possible that these two
will find themselves competing
side by side in the whole
grains sections of supermarkets
in the years to come.
There are certain grains in
history that enjoyed profound
respect from the peoples
of early civilizations.
The Chinese considered
millet a sacred crop.
The Mayans believed that humans
were fashioned from maize.
The Aztecs used amaranth in
their religious activities.
Spelt, on the other hand, did
not experience such veneration
during the early times.
It was associated
with the poor populace
as a staple food for peasants.
This image of spelt has been
immortalized in literature.
In a Russian tale titled
The Tale of the Priest
and His Workman Balda
written by Alexander Pushkin,
a poor peasant named
Balda agreed to work
for a mean priest.
His only pay was that
he would be allowed
to hit the priest
three times on the head
and that he is to be
fed with boiled spelt.
Not a lot of Russian kids
today may know what spelt is,
but they are familiar with
its social significance
through stories like this.
Another story in literature
that uses spelt
as an image device
to establish distinction
between the rich and the poor,
rural living and
urban lifestyle,
is found in the
second book of Satires
by the roman poet, Horace.
He ended Satire 6 with a
story of the country mouse
and city mouse where the
country mouse served spelt
when the city mouse
visited him in his cave.
The city mouse invited
the country mouse
to try the urban life.
But there, they were
met with a large dog
and the country mouse realized
that he had a good life
in his cage eating spelt
Literature may have
cemented spelt's image
as a peasant food, but during
the Middle Ages in Germany,
there was a nun who saw spelt
in a whole different light.
St. Hildegard von
Bingen, born in 1098 AD
was a known visionary,
musician, mystic, and herbalist.
She was a famous pioneer
of holistic healing.
Aside from writing nearly
2,000 natural remedies,
she also strongly promoted
spelt's medicinal benefits
because she believed that the
grain created a healthy body,
good blood, and a happy mind.
She actually called spelt
"The Queen of Cereals".
Spelt has a chance to redeem
itself to show the modern world
that it deserves to be seen
from a whole new prospective.
From being a grain of the past,
spelt has qualities that can
make it a grain of the future.
It's unfortunate to see how
the gems of the ancient world
had to suffer demise at
the hands of modernization,
even spelt wasn't spared.
Along with the advent
of the 20th century,
were modern practices that
revolutionized agriculture.
With the introduction of
grain varieties and hybrids
that have higher yields and
easier handling requirements,
spelt had to step aside and
give away to its modern cousin
wheat until eventually no one
was cultivating spelt anymore.
The 1960's and 1970's saw the
rise of various environment
movements which then led to
the organic food movement
in the 1990's.
Because of this more people
have become interested
in organic gardening and
community-based agriculture
to grow fruits, vegetables
and whole grains.
It's fortunate that this has
sparked a renewed interest
in old grains including spelt.
Spelt is still not
as popular as wheat
and it's more expensive.
While most grains
are self-threshing,
spelt needs to be
mechanically dehulled,
adding more manufacturing
steps before it can be milled.
This post-harvest dilemma,
plus the fact that
it's low-yielding,
easily discourages
a lot of farmers
to commit to cultivating it.
Spelt's fall into obscurity
can now be considered
its greatest advantage.
Unlike some grains
that have been subject
to hybridization and
genetic experimentation,
spelt was able to dodge
biological modifications
Thus it was able to
retain the integrity
of its ancient composition.
Spelt is used as a substitute
for modern common wheat flour
in making pasta, breads,
cookies, muffins,
pancakes, and cereal.
Due to the rising
demand for whole grains,
spelt is slowly gaining
a strong foothold
in mainstream markets.
For example in Britain,
breads, cookies, and pasta
made from whole grain
spelt flour are sold
in health food shops
and specialty bakeries.
In southern Germany and
southwestern Poland,
spelt is still produced, where
it is usually kiln dried,
giving it a green color.
These green kernels
called gruenkern
are used in baked
goods and soups.
Spelt is also a
famous traditional
ingredient for brewing
beer and vodka especially
in European countries
such as Belgium,
Germany, and Poland.
It is also a
traditional animal feed,
especially in Europe
and North America.
The seeds are first ground
or milled before use.
It's usually a feed
grain substitute for
oats during Spring
when oats are not easily grown.
While spelt has a similar
feed value to that of oats,
it is, however, higher in
yield and protein content.
Data on production and
consumption of spelt
is still scarce today.
Its total statistics
is too small
to have any significant
impact in any local market,
let alone in the
global grain industry.
That's why it just falls under
the category "other grains"
where it shares data
with other lesser grains.
Things look promising for spelt
as it continues to garner
more interest from people
who are in search of
alternative foods,
heirloomed varieties or
organic grain products.
It may be true that spelt
was a poor man's grain
during the Middle Ages,
but that doesn't mean that
it should still suffer
that same reputation
in modern times.
As a matter of fact,
it has great odds of
rivaling modern wheat
due to its excellent
nutrient profile,
and not to mention its
exciting flavor and texture.
For example, wheat tends
to harden when cooked.
Spelt, however, becomes
crisp without being hard.
Like Barley, it's
chewy and sweet,
but doesn't feel
slimy when eaten.
You can vary spelt's texture,
depending on the manner of
preparation and cooking.
First, here are some
general cooking tips.
Rinse spelt under running water.
Make sure to remove any debris.
Then for easier and
faster cooking time,
soak it for eight hours
or even overnight.
Before cooking, drain the
water and rinse it again.
For a soft and fluffy
texture like steamed rice,
cook 1 cup of spelt
in 3 cups of water.
Simmer for one a a half hours.
Here are two
recipes you can try.
The first is called
Spelt Tomato Soup.
For the spelt tomato soup,
prepare the following.
1 cup of spelt, 2
1/2 - 3 cups of water
4 tablespoons of
extra virgin olive oil
1 can of chopped tomatoes,
500 grams of cherry tomatoes
2 sprigs of basil, 3 garlic
cloves (peeled and smashed)
salt and pepper to taste
First, cook spelt in boiling
water for 30 - 40 minutes
or until tender, set aside.
Second, in a large saucepan,
put the olive oil and
the canned tomatoes.
Add the cherry tomatoes,
basil, and garlic.
Bring it to a boil and
simmer for 30 minutes.
Let it cool for awhile.
Lastly, put the cooked spelt
into the tomato mixture.
You can adjust its
thickness by adding water.
Season with salt and pepper.
For the Spelt Summer Salad,
you need the
following ingredients.
1 1/2 cups of whole grain
spelt, 4 1/2 cups of water
1/4 cup chopped red onion, 1
1/2 cups halved cherry tomatoes
1 cup chopped cucumber,
1 cup halved black olives
1 tablespoon of white
balsamic vinegar
1 tablespoon of olive oil
1/2 cup of crumbled feta cheese.
In a large pot, put
spelt and water.
Bring it to a boil then simmer
uncovered for about 1 minute
or until the water is absorbed
and the spelt is tender.
Then drain it, rinse
with cold water
and refrigerate for
at least 30 minutes.
For the dressing, in a bowl,
whisk together the
balsamic vinegar and oil.
To serve, in a large
serving bowl, put the spelt
and toss in the red onion,
cherry tomatoes, cucumbers,
and olives, then drizzle
the dressing all over.
Because spelt's
production ceased in
the early 20th century,
it is relatively new to
a lot of people today.
Thanks to the global
movement towards
healthier and
greener lifestyles,
spelt is very fortunate to
be given another chance.
This time to impress
the modern world.